## Orthotopic Liver Transplantation for Urea Cycle Enzyme Deficiency

SATORU TO DO,^, THOMAS E. STARZL,', ANDREAS  TZAKIS,~. KEITH J. BENKOV,3  FRANTISEK KALOUSEK,4 TAKEYORI SAHEKI,5 KWICHI TANIKAWA,~ AND WAYNE A. FENTON4

'Department of Surgery, University Health Center of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, and 2the Veterans Administration Medical  Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 3Department of Pediatrics,  Mount Sinai Medical  Center, New  York, New York 10029-6574; 4Department of Human Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut; 5Department of Biochemistry, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan; and 'Department of Medicine, Kurume  University,  Kurume, Japan.

Hyperammonemia, abnormalities in plasma  amino acids and  abnormalities o f   standard  liver functions were corrected by orthotopic liver  transplantation in a 14-day-old  boy with carbamyl phosphate synthetase-I deficiency  and  in  a  35-yr-old  man  with argininosuccinic acid synthetase deficiency. The first patient had high plasma glutamine  levels and  no measureable  citrulline, whereas citrulline values were markedly increased in Patient  2. Enzyme  analysis  of  the  original  livers showed undetectable activity of  carbamyl phosphate synthetase-I  in  Patient  1 and  arginosuccinic  acid synthetase in Patient 2.  Both patients were comatose before surgery. Intellectual recovery of patient 1  has been  slightly  retarded  because  of a  brain  abscess caused by  Aspergillus  infection  after  surgery. Both patients are well at 34 and 40 mo, respectively, after surgery. Our  experience has shown that  orthotopic liver  transplantation corrects  the  life-threatening metabolic abnormalities caused by deficiencies  in the urea cycle enzymes carbamyl phosphate synthetase-I and  arginosuccinic  acid  synthetase.  Seven  other patients -six  with  ornithine  transcarbamylase  deficiency and another with carbamyl phosphate synthetase-I  deficiency- are  known  to  have  been treated elsewhere with liver transplantation 1Vz yr or longer ago. Four of these seven  recipients also are  well, with follow-ups of 1% to 5 y r . Thus liver transplantation corrects the metabolic abnormalities  of three of the six urea cycle  enzyme deficiencies, and  presumably would correct all. (HEPATOLOGY 1992;15:419-422.)

It  was proposed in 1975  by Dr. Leon Rosenberg  of Yale University that  liver  transplantation  would  allow  somatic correction of diseases caused by deficiency of any of the six urea cycle enzymes (Personal communication,

Received August 5, 1991; accepted October 31,  1 9 9 1 .

This work was aided by research grants from the Department  of Veterans Affairs and by  project grant  No. DK 29961 from  the  National  Institutes o f Health.

Address reprint requests to: Thomas E. Starzl, M.D.,  Ph.D., Department of Surgery,  3601 Fifth Avenue,  Falk  Clinic 4 West, Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 15213.

1975). The liver enzymes responsible  for biosynthesis of urea  from  its  principal  precursors  (ammonium  and glutamine) are N-acetylglutamate synthetase, carbamyl phosphate synthetase-I (CPS-I), ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), argininosuccinic acid synthetase (ASS), argininosuccinase and arginase (1). N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency has been reported in one man (2). OTC deficiency is an X chromosome-linked  disorder, and  the  other 4 deficiencies  are  autosomal  recessive traits.  High plasma ammonium and glutamine levels are thought to cause astrocyte  swelling, brain  edema and secondary neuron injury (3), with variable neurological or  behavioral  consequences  that  may  be  acute  or chronic.  We report here  the  amelioration  of such complications  after liver transplantation in a 14-day-old white boy  with  CPS-I deficiency and  a  35-yr-old Japanese man with ASS deficiency.

## CASE REPORTS

Case 1. An  apparently  normal,  full-term  male  child  of first-cousin  parents became  bradycardic  and  apneic  shortly after  birth  on  May  18, 1988, requiring  endotracheal  intubation.  By  postpartum  day  2,  he was  unresponsive  to pain stimuli, although results of  a computed  tomographic scan of the  head were normal. Serum ammonia level on day 6 was 387 pmol/L, total bilirubin was 202 pmol/L (direct bilirubin = 27.4  kmol/L) and serum transaminases were normal. Peritoneal  dialysis on day 7 reduced serum  ammonia level from 514 to  160 kmol/L. With  the diagnosis  of  CPS-I urea cycle enzyme deficiency,  the  patient was treated with an  intravenous infusion  of  arginine, sodium  benzoate  and  sodium  phenylacetate supplemented with Intralipid and 5%  dextrose (41, and tube  feeding  with  polyxose  and protein-free  Mead  Johnson formula 80056 (Mead Johnson, Evansville, IN). After transfer to  the  University  of  Pittsburgh, orthotopic  liver  transplantation (OLT) was performed with a newborn cadaver liver on June  2,1988, at 14  days of age. Biliary drainage  was performed by choledochojejunostomy (Roux-en-Y  anastomosis). The surgery  and  subsequent  immunosuppression with  cyclosporine and prednisone were performed with standard techniques ( 5 ) .

Severe rejection beginning  in postoperative  wk 3 necessitated augmented steroid dosage and the addition of OKT3. An Aspergillus brain abscess was treated successfully with anti- ND = not detectable.

TABLE 1. Plasma amino acids in patient 1 before and after OLT

|                             | Before OLT"   | Before OLT"   | After OLTb   | After OLTb   |
|-----------------------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|--------------|
| Amino acids                 | Normal range  | Asof 5/27/88  | Normal range | Asof 4/12/91 |
| Aspartic acid               | 1-17"         | 16            | 0-4          | < l o        |
| Glutamic acid               | 1-85          | 72            | 0-150        | 30           |
| Glutamine                   | 337-673       | 909           | 320-870      | 650          |
| Proline                     | 51-271        | 177           | 30-400       | 150          |
| Glycine                     | 87-323        | 251           | 90-430       | 250          |
| Citrulline                  | 10-34         | ND            | 0-70         | 10           |
| Alpha-amino-N- butyric acid | 4-32          | 34            | 0-40         | 40           |
| Valine                      | 78-326        | 86            | 70-350       | 190          |
| Ornithine                   | 22-94         | 59            | 0-120        | 50           |
| Arginine                    | 15-115        | 24            | 10-130       | 30           |

- "Measured by an automated amino acid analyzer.

*Measured by column chromatography.

"All data expressed as FmoUL.

TABLE 2. Plasma amino acids in patient 2 before and after OLT

| Amino acids   | Normal range   | Before OLT (5131188)   |   After OLT(8125190) |
|---------------|----------------|------------------------|----------------------|
| Aspartic acid | 3.9-6.7"       | < 3                    |                  4.5 |
| Glutamic acid | 14-59          | 57                     |                   51 |
| Glutamine     | 560-890        | 641                    |                  612 |
| Proline       | 110-310        | 98                     |                  190 |
| Glycine       | 180-370        | 116                    |                  199 |
| Citrulline    | 22-52          | 445                    |                   47 |
| Alanine       | 280-650        | 229                    |                  424 |
| Valine        | 180-370        | 165                    |                  204 |
| Ornithine     | 40-100         | 65                     |                  124 |
| Arginine      | 70-160         | 207                    |                   98 |

TABLE 3. Urea cycle enzymes in patient 1

| Enzyme   | Patient 1   | (sample control) Normal range   |
|----------|-------------|---------------------------------|
| CPS-I    | < 0.005"    | 0.26-1.0                        |
| OTC      | 28.7        | 19-38                           |

biotics,  open  drainage  and, ultimately, ventriculoperitoneal shunt.  Bacteremia  and  systemic  cytomegalovirus  infection further complicated the course, necessitating hospitalization for 7% mo (6). Subsequently,  the child lived at home without special domiciliary care. Growth and development have been uninterrupted during the 40 mo of follow-up, with a weight gain from 2.5 to 20 kg on an  unrestricted  diet.  Normal physical and intellectual  milestones  have  been  delayed,  presumably because  of  the  cortical  injury  caused  by  the brain  abscess, meningitis and/or  hydrocephalic complications. Liver function is normal, and most the recent blood ammonia level after 37 mo was 34 kmol/L (normal&lt; 39 pmol/L).

TABLE 4. Urea cycle enzymes i n patient 2

| Enzyme   | Patient   | Normal liver (sample control)   |
|----------|-----------|---------------------------------|
| AS       | 293"      | 453                             |
| ASS      | 2         | 300                             |
| CPS-I    | 37        | 58                              |
| OTC      | 4,337     | 7,359                           |

AS = argininosuccinase.

"All data expressed as FrnoVhrimg protein.

Case 2. A 35-yr-old Japanese man was the second son of healthy first-cousin  parents.  He had  a  normal brother  and sister  and  was  the  father  of  a  healthy  daughter.  He  was ostensibly normal until three episodes of  temporary  altered consciousness and  behavioral aberrations  occurred in  January, April and May  1987. After initial psychiatric hospitalization, he was transferred to Kurume University, where his serum ammonium and  serum  citrulline  levels  were  264  and  445 pmol/L,  respectively  (normal,  &lt;39  and &lt;52 KmoliL). On diagnosis of  ASS deficiency, he was prescribed  sodium  benzoate, arginine  and  branched  amino  acid  infusion,  with restriction of oral protein intake. During the following 18 mo, he had  four major  episodes of  serum ammonium  elevation, with transient bouts of stage  IV coma, which were successfully treated by hemodialysis. Because of deterioration  and stage I11 and IV coma necessitating ventilator support,  he was flown in November  1988 to the University of  Pittsburgh, where OLT was performed on December 23, 1987,  with biliary drainage by duct-to-duct anastomosis.

Preoperative total  serum bilirubin  of  425  ymol/L  fell  to normal within a  few days. A computed tomographic scan of the head in November  1988 had revealed cortical atrophy. Postoperatively, complete recovery of  consciousness and removal from ventilator support required several weeks, but convalescence was otherwise uncomplicated under cyclosporine-steroid therapy (5).  The  patient was discharged from the hospital after 44  days  and  has  been  at  home  since  then.  Recovery  of neuromotor and  intellectual capabilities required  many months, but eventually the patient returned to his previous position  as vice president  of  a  construction company.  Liver function  is  normal 34 mo  postoperatively.  Blood  ammonia levels have been 7 to 21 Fmol/L (normal &lt; 39 Fmol/L).

## BIOCHEMICAL METHODS

Amino Acids. Plasma amino acids in patient  1  were measured  9 days after birth ( 5 days before transplantation) by an automated amino acid analyzer. At 34 mo after  OLT,  amino  acids  were  determined  by  column chromatography (7). Amino  acid  separation  was  performed  by  a method  modified  from  Hamilton (8). In Patient 2, the plasma amino acids were measured in the absence of treatment, 5 to 7 mo before transplantation, with  a automated  amino acid  analyzer.  The examinations were repeated 3, 4, and 20 mo after OLT.

Liver  Enzymes. The removed native  livers were immediately  cut  into  small  pieces,  frozen  with  liquid nitrogen and stored at -80" C until the analyses of urea cycle  enzymes.  CPS-I  and  OTC  were  measured  in Patient 1  in the Department of Human Genetics of the Yale  University  School  of  Medicine.  Determinations were  with  a  small-scale adaptation  of  the  method  of Nuzum  and  Snodgrass  (9).  The  liver  tissues  from Patient 2 were analyzed for CPS-I, OTC, ASS and AS activity  in  the  Department  of  Biochemistry  of  Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan, using a previously described method (10).

TABLE 5.  Urea cycle enzyme deficiencies  treated more than 1% yr ago with OLT

|         |                                             |            |            |                   | OUTCOME                       | OUTCOME              | OUTCOME                              |
|---------|---------------------------------------------|------------|------------|-------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Patient | Center                                      | Dateof OLT | Age at OLT | Enzyme deficiency | Aliveldead                    | Mental state         | Reference                            |
|         | Yale University                             | 8186       | 21mo       | OTC               | Alive                         | Normal and in school | 1; personal com- munication of 8191' |
|         | Lille, France                               | 2/88       | 5Yr        | OTC               | Alive                         | Normal               | 13; personal com- munication of 8191 |
|         | University of Pittsburgh                    | 6/88       | 14days     | CPS-I             | Alive                         | Slightly re- tarded  | This report                          |
|         | Boston Children's Hospital                  | 8/88       | 18mo       | OTC               | Alive                         | Normal               | Personal communi- cation of 8/91     |
|         | University of Minnesota                     | 10/88      | 20 mo      | CPS-I             | Died of pneumonia after 18 mo | -                    | 14                                   |
|         | University of Pittsburgh                    | 12/88      | 35 yr      | ASS               | Alive                         | Normal               | This report                          |
|         | University of Chicago                       | 10/89*     | 20 mo      | OTC               | Died 5/26/90                  | -                    | 12                                   |
|         | University of Chicago                       | 11/89      | 21 mo      | OTC               | Died 11/17/89                 | -                    | Personal communi- cation of 4/91     |
|         | Riley Children's Hospital, Indianapolis, IN | 2/90       | 28 mo      | OTC               | Alive                         | Retarded             | Personal communi- cation of 8/91     |

## RESULTS

Plasma Amino Acids. The pretransplant  plasma  in Patient  1  had  elevated  levels  of  glutamine.  Citrulline was undetectable, and the other measured amino acids were relatively normal (Table 1).  Plasma amino acids 34 mo after surgery were normal. Citrulline levels became detectable.

The plasma amino acids in Patient 2 before and after transplantation  are  summarized  in  Table  2.  The  extremely high  preoperative  levels  of  citrulline  and the modest  elevations  of  arginine  were  corrected  at  all measured postoperative times. However, ornithine level (normal = 40 to 100 pmol/L) was slightly elevated at 3 mo (153 pmol/L) and at 20 mo (124 pmoVL) postoperatively.

Tissue Studies. On light microscopy,  the native liver  of patient  1  had  only  minor,  nonspecific abnormalities. Similarly,  electron  microscopic  studies  were  normal, except for nonspecific elongation of  the mitochondria. CPS-I activity was undetectable in the homogenate of this liver. OTC activity  was normal when compared with that of a control liver sample (Table 3).

The  native  liver  of  patient  2  was  enlarged,  with cholestasis  and  massive  steatosis  and  hemosiderosis. Periportal fibrosis, but  no cirrhosis, was present.  The liver  homogenate  was  devoid  of ASS  activity,  but exhibited  significant  CPS-1,  OTC,  and  AS  activity (Table 4).

## DISCUSSION

The diagnosis of urea cycle enzyme deficiency and the specific  enzyme  involved  were established with certainty in  our  two  cases.  Both  had  hyperammonemia  and plasma amino acid abnormalities, which permitted the presumptive  diagnosis of  the  enzyme  deficiency. The diagnoses  were  confirmed  by  analysis  of  the  subsequently excised livers. To our knowledge, the 2-wk-old infant with CPS-I deficiency  is the  youngest patient ever to  undergo  successful liver  transplantation.  The  36yr-old  man  is  the  only  patient  with  ASS  deficiency treated  thus  far with  liver transplantation. Although both  patients  were  comatose  at  the  time  of liver replacement, their lethal metabolic abnormalities were promptly  and  permanently  corrected;  this  has  been achieved with numerous other liver-based  inborn errors (11).

In addition to these two patients,  seven others with urea cycle deficiencies are known to have been treated with liver transplantation before March 1990 (Table 5). Six  of  the  seven  had  OTC  deficiency  (12,  13). The seventh was a 20-mo-old  boy with CPS-I deficiency (14). Postoperatively, this child had undetectable citrulline in the  plasma,  prompting  Tuchman  to  recommend  citrulline supplementation postoperatively (14).  This treatment was not provided in our patient with CPS-I deficiency  during  his more-than-3-yr  survival.  The finding  of citrulline  in  the  plasma of our patient suggests that  in  the human,  unlike  the rat  (15, 16), citrulline originates  in  the  liver and  in  the  gut.  It  is  also noteworthy that the amino acid profile was  not  completely corrected by liver transplantation  in Patient  2. Plasma ornithine level remained slightly high as late as 20 mo after surgery.

The cumulative experience in our two cases and in the seven others elsewhere establishes the effectiveness of liver transplantation for at least three  urea cycle deficiencies.  When  the  operation  is successful, the metabolic consequences are corrected to an extent not approached by attempts to activate alternative pathways of  waste  nitrogen  synthesis  and  excretion  or  by  restriction of  dietary protein intake. However, the use of liver transplantation for somatic  correction may prove to be only a step  toward enzyme replacement. Such therapy with measures other than whole-liver or even isolated hepatocyte transplantation  is not hard to envision with recent advances in understanding of the molecular basis for  these  diseases. Virus-mediated  transfer  of  human ASS has already been accomplished in rodents (17, IS), suggesting that the introduction of a functional complementary DNA into  hepatic  or  nonhepatic  autologous cells could be  a practical  therapeutic  possibility in the near future.

## REFERENCES

1. Brusilow SW, Horwich AL. Urea cycle enzymes. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D, eds. The metabolic basis of inherited diseases. 6th ed. New York McGraw-Hill, 1989:629-663.
2. Bachmann C, Krahenbuhl S,  Colombo  JP, Schubiger G, Jaggi KH, Tonz 0:  N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency: a  disorder  of ammonia detoxication. N Engl J Med  1981;304:543-544.
3. Voorhies TM, Ehrlich ME, Duffy TE, Petito CK, Plum FI. Acute hyperammonemia in the young primate: physiologic and neuropathologic correlates. Pediatr Res 1983;17:971-976.
4.  Brusilow  SW,  Danney  M,  Waber  LJ,  Batshaw  M,  Burton  B, Levitsky L, Roth K, et al. Treatment of episodic  hyperammonemia in children with inborn errors of urea synthesis. New Engl J Med 1984;3  10:  1630-  1634.
5. Starzl  TE,  Demetris  AJ.  Liver  transplantation.  Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers, Inc., 1990:71-84.
6.  Green M, Wald ER, Tzakis A, Todo S,  and Starzl TE. Aspergillosis of the CNS in a pediatric liver transplant recipient: case report and review. Rev Infect Dis 1991;13:653-657.
7.  Roth M, Hampai A. Column chromatography of amino acids with fluorescence detection. J Chromatograph  1993;83:353-356.
8.  Moore S, Speckman DH, Stein WH. Chromatography of  amino acids on sulfonated polystyrene resin: an improved system. Anal Chem 1958;30:1185-1190.
9.  Nuzum CT, Snodgrass PJ. Multiple assays of  the five urea-cycle enzymes in human liver homogenates. In: Grisolia S,  Baguena R, Mayor  F, eds.  The  urea  cycie.  New York: WiIey-Interscience, 1976:235-349.
10. Saheki T, Ueda A,  Hosoya M,  Kusumi K, Takada  S, Tsuda M, Katsunuma  T.  Qualitative  and  quantitative  abnormalities  of argininosuccinate  synthetase  in  citrulinemia.  Clin  Chim  Acta 1981;109:325-335.
11. Starzl TE, Demetris AJ, Van Thiel DH. Medical progress: liver transplantation. Part I. N Engl J Med  1989;321:1014-1022.
12. Broelsch  CE,  Emond  JC,  Whitington  PF,  Thistlethwaite  JR, Baker AL, Lichto JL. Application of reduced-size liver transplants as  split  grafts,  auxiliary  orthotopic  grafts,  and  living  related segmental transplants. Ann Surg 1990;212:368-377.
13. Largilliere  C,  Houssin  D,  Gottrand  F, Mathey  C, Checoury A, Alagille  D,  Farriaux  JP.  Liver  transplantation for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency  in a girl. Pediatrics 1989;115: 415-417.
14. Featherston WR, Rogers QR, Freedland RA. Relative importance of  the kidney and liver in synthesis of  arginine by the rat. Am J Physiol 1973;224:127-129.
15. Windmueller  HG,  Spaeth AE. Source  of fate  of circulating citrulline. Am J Physiol 1981;241:E473-E480.
16. Wood PA, Partridge CA, O'Brien WE, Beaudet AL. Expression of human  argininosuccinate  synthetase after  retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. Som Cell Mol Genet 1986;12:493-500.
17. Wood  PA,  Herman GE,  Chao  CYJ, O'Brien WE,  Beaudet AL. Retrovirus-mediated  gene  transfer  of argininosuccinate synthetase  into  cultured rodent  cells  and  human  citrullinemic fibroblasts:  Cold  Spring Harb  Symp Quart  Biol  1986;51:10271034.